Well, the Joe Rogan experience it's to protect freedom,
or if you're a slave trader it's to rescue the Africans from terrible lives in
Africa and bring them to the comfortable plantations. Um,
that was actually an argument. Oh yeah.
The slave trade had at complete rescue narrative.
I'm talking about the British slave trade here, because that was,
that was the first really intense campaign of industrial denial.
I could find the BR the British dominated the slave trade in the 17 hundreds
and the hay. Uh,
they faced a very powerful abolition movement at the end of that century,
which was really going to the public and saying, look at how brutal this is.
They had witnesses, they had the torture devices,
they had all kinds of evidence. Um,
and the British were really responding because they,
even though they dominated the slave trade, you know,
th they had this notion of themselves as civilized and,
and promoting freedom and being very humane.
So this was starting to really affect the industry.
So the traders and the planters got together, they formed a slave lobby.
They had a very organized campaign in response. It was a slave lobby.
There was a very powerful slate lobby. I mean,
the thing about the slave trade was you had people invested in it from
the Royal family down to the local bakers, uh,
to many members of parliament. I mean, it was a widely accepted,
fully legitimate industry so that the abolitionists really had their work cut
out from, for them. And they had all this evidence,
the industry comes back and they, they knew they couldn't just say, oh,
it's not so brutal.
They actually came back with this complete counter narrative, which was,
we are rescuing these people that, that there,
the Africans are eager to be purchased.
They actually try to market themselves as how fit they are for, for work.
They enjoy that crossing across the Atlantic. There is singing,
dancing games of chance. And when they get to the plantations,
it is incredibly comfortable. They get comfy little houses.
It's like a cradle to grave welfare state.
They don't have to worry if they get sick, we take care of them. We feed them.
Um,
and they're doing way better than those poor peasants back there in Britain or
those poor miners or those people working in the, in the new factories. So,
uh, that was, that was part of it. Then the next part of it was that they,
they said that if they had left them in Africa,
if you didn't continue this trade,
all of these prisoners of war would be massacred,
or they would be eaten by cannibals, or they would die of famine.
So they were, this was a rescue narrative.
And here's the really clever part of this,
because if you believe that you are rescuing them,
or if you persuade other people, I'm not suggesting the industry believe this,
but if you can persuade people that you are rescuing them,
the flip side of it is that abolition would doom them.
You would be shutting the gates of mercy on mankind, uh,
because as one, one trader put it,
the house of is really the,
the house of freedom to them. I've may have missed spoken that a little bit,
but it was a truly Orwellian quote. And, and,
and so that way you,
you translate abolition into inhumanity,
into brutality and,
and you portray the continued slave trade as a way to, to save these people. Oh,
one, one quote was great that if you were to free the slaves and,
and by the way, at this point,
they weren't actually talking about freeing the existing slaves,
just stopping the flow of new slaves.
But one of the quotes was that freeing the slaves would be cramming Liberty down
the throats of people incapable of digesting it.
Wow. Yeah.
So this was the first example that you found of industry that was
working to try to distort the perceptions of reality
so that they can continue what they're doing. Right.
And, uh, you know,
they did a lot of other things that we've seen modern industries doing. They,
they, you know,
I mentioned the reference to the poor peasants and they also talked about,
you know, how would you like it Britain, if,
if people came in and started telling the peasants and the soldiers and the
sailors that they had rights, uh, you know, so basically this kind of, you know,
help us, or you are next,
your whole class structure is going to collapse that kind of an argument. Um,
and then they had an argument about basically failing to make a distinction
between their industry and their interests and the whole country, or rather,
you know,
kind of an early version of what's good for the country as good for GM and vice
versa. They said, if you abolish this trade,
it means universal bankruptcy for the kingdom.
It means Britain is not powerful anymore.
It means Britain becomes a province of France. Uh,
it means in the sugar islands that the slaves will massacre the,
the whites exterminate the whites and in, or maybe make the white slaves. Um,
so they basically just created this incredible slippery slope that every,
that any kind of reform, or certainly abolition of this industry would,
would be disastrous for the entire kingdom.
So how well documented is this in terms of like the influencers, like who,
who started this, like, and th is it,
was there like open discussions about how to spin this in
a way that it's going to get people to think that slavery is a good thing?
Well, I don't know about internal discussions within the industry.
What we do have are lots and lots of books and pamphlets,
because this was all done in writing. We also have some hearings and we have,
uh, parliamentary debates. They were recorded, not, you know, verbatim,
but people try to write them down.
And so we have some version of what was actually said in these debates,
in the various hearings, there were parliamentary hearings.
So there's actually quite a lot of evidence of the arguments being made in
their own words.
So, and then this was primarily in Britain.
Right? Right. And this is, well, that's what I'm talking about here.
Obviously there was the, we had our own abolition movement here.
Right. That's what I was going to ask. You did those same arguments, uh,
did they actually get presented in the United States?
Some of them did in the United States,
it was different because of course you had an entire society built around
slavery. And I read one,
one reference when historian saying that about half of the defenses of slavery
came from the clergy.
It wasn't quite the same sort of clearly he hears an industry and here's an
audience that they're talking to. Um,
so that's one of the reasons I didn't focus quite at all, really on the,
on the American debate of it was from clergy. That's what this, this, uh,
historian said. I, I didn't dig into those. I did, by the way though, find one,
uh, source.
And now I don't remember if he was a plantation owner or something else who
described, um, the called slavery, you know,
basically a way to make people as happy as can be and,
and called it the ideal of communism, which was funny.
Cause you don't even think of communism of that debate is existing. This was,
would have been an 18 hundreds now. Um,
but he was saying that the north is exploiting.
These workers not taking care of them,
but in the south week we take care of them. We make them happy as.
Well. Jesus. Yeah. So.
Is this a pattern that existed before that, like, is this, is there, uh,
is there any evidence that there was something, I mean,
it seems like whenever people start to make money doing something,
whenever a corporation, particularly a corporation, right?
Because there's this diffusion of responsibility in a large group of folks and
they have this, you know,
this obligation to earn money for all the people that are involved in the
corporation.
So they start rationalizing their decisions and then twisting things around.
But is this, uh, is this something that can be traced back before then?
Is this an, an, a natural human trait, this kind of deception?
Well, I can't specifically answer whether it can be traced before then because I
didn't try to trace it. Um, but I would not be at all surprised, uh,
because I do think it's a natural human trait. Um, I mean, I, uh,
one of the issues that I,
I started to struggle with on this book was deciding to what extent are people
lying? And when are they actually deceiving themselves? And I realized early on,
there was just no way to write this book if I was going to try to parse that
out.
And I also decided it doesn't matter that much because I think these are really
very much intertwined. Um,
and they're both equally destructive and they're both, I think,
equally responsive to these kinds of external circumstances that we create
in corporations when we form corporations and we put them into them into a
marketplace. So I do think it's part of human nature. Um,
I do think we've created this system that brings this out in people and really
encourages it in in many ways. I mean,
you mentioned the diffusion of responsibility and that is huge because
we do know,
and I dip into the social psychology and here not a ton of it because
that science is still relatively new and kind of, you know,
a little bit thin compared to the environmental science that I,
that I talk about, which is very, very deep. But, um,
we do know that when you, when you diffuse responsibility,
it makes it very easy for people not to feel responsible for the harm that's
done. So if you've got a corporation, of course you have division of labor.
You also have division of management from ownership.
So if you're a lower worker and you're told to lie about something or cause some
harm, well, you're minding your own business and you, and you let the,
your boss take responsibility. If you're the boss, uh,
you're focused maybe on your employees and certainly on your
shareholders. So if you're lying about something or causing harm,
it doesn't necessarily feel like a personal selfish act of deception.
It probably feels like an act of loyalty and responsibility to your
shareholders, shareholders, air holders, aren't going to care or no,
because first of all, they're far away usually, uh, they,
they don't really know what's going on. They have maybe just a temporary,
transactional interest in what's going on. They just bought the stock.
They want to sell it quickly and make some money. So,
so you don't really have anybody there who feels really responsible for this,
that there was a definition of, uh,
of the corporation from the early 20th century in something called the cynics
dictionary as an ingenious device for obtaining
personal profit, without personal responsibility. And,
and of course that is exactly what we intend from corporations because they are,
we, we grant limited liability to the shareholders and that's why it's that
it's that protection from risk that people are willing to pool their capital.
And, and that sort of very key to, to the very idea of, of a corporation.
And then of course the, uh,
the focus on profits means that you are constantly focused on, uh, on money.
And, you know, at every, in, in the most short-term way,
not even long-term profits, which would be a narrow enough focus. Um,
but then there's a lot of other things to add to it. Uh,
you you've got competition, um, by definition,
certainly if you're in competitive markets, we want there to be competition.
So that means you are already in a kind of tribal mindset. Uh,
and you've got the etiology of the marketplace, which, you know,
we can go back to Adam Smith, the invisible hand, and,
and basically the notion that if you can pursue your own self-interest in the
marketplace will automatically convert that to public good.
And that does work in a lot of cases and probably worked a lot better in the 17
hundreds,
but when you've got these enormous organizations that have
incredible market power and these very new risky technologies often,
uh, it, it is much harder to, to be confident that that's going to work.
And then more recently we've seen that,
that idea that you don't have to worry about the social consequences of your
commercial action, uh, just get intensified. We, we had, you know,
Milton Friedman in 1970,
writing this very persuasive article saying that the only real
objective,
the only legitimate objective of a corporation is to maximize shareholder
profit.
And if they're talking about protecting the environment or doing any of these
other things, that's socialism and, and that's the legitimate and the,
and that really did, uh, sway a lot of people that movement really move forward.
And then it got more extreme in the nineties. And,
and in the 21st century where you've got this,
this strain of,
of intense faith in market forces that was
manifested by Alan Greenspan at the fed by the Koch
brothers, David Koch has passed away. So,
so now Charles Koch and the network of influence groups
that he created the think tanks, the free market groups,
these different academic groups. So, you know, one of the things that I,
I tried to trace a little bit in the book is talking about the rise of the
consumer movement and the environmental movement in the sixties and seventies,
and people saying, wait a minute, we need corporations to,
to be aware of these problems.
And we need government to regulate corporations to make sure that our cars are
safe and our ozone layer is not destroyed. Uh, but then starting in 1980,
when Reagan is elected, you suddenly see those,
those concerns replaced with a concern regulation and,
and really a backlash that, that, you know, has, has come and gone,
but basically intensified over the years. And, and now of course,
we have a situation where, you know,
not only do we have a government unwilling to regulate,
but we have one that is rolling back critical regulations that were put in place
by previous administrations.
And of course, influenced by these very corporations to do that.
Absolutely. And I mean, it gets,
it gets kind of complicated here because if you think, for example,
about Charles Coke and Coke industries, it's based in oil refining.
So that is very much based in the fossil fuel industry, but, but,
uh, the Koch network is very ideological, passionately ideological,
um, and they just happened to coincide with, with being in the,
in the fossil fuel industry.
But you have a lot of other groups that have received money from oil companies
from the coal industry. So it gets kind of integrated. Um,
I do try to not treat them all the same in the book.
I try to kind of differentiate and,
and you really do have a difference between the, the kind of Coke perspective,
the coal industry perspective, the oil industry perspective,
and then all of these little free market groups, actually,
they fit more around the Coke side.
But they all seem to have one thing in common that they're rationalizing and
their actions because they want to continue to make profits regardless of the
impact on the environment or the people. Exactly.
And this that's a weird thing about just the idea of a corporation itself.
It's almost like a diabolical vehicle for, for allowing people to do things,
you know, to, to, to be able to do something and say, Hey,
we're going to do this as a collective and therefore, no,
no individuals are responsible for the results of the collective.
Particularly if you're not the one who gets to decide what gets done,
you're just taking orders and you're just doing your job and your job is
segmented and it's all compartmentalized. So you're not,
you're not dumping anything in the river bomb.
You don't have to worry about that, but, uh,
I like your new car and that's a beautiful house that you got,
you bought with the profits of poisoning lakes.
Well, that's, that's exactly it. In fact,
I suggest in the book that if you were a super villain and you wanted to create
a society that would ultimately destroy itself by imposing huge
risks on each other and on the planet,
you would probably create something that looks a lot like our current
corporate dominated global economy in the sense of these organizations that
amplify your self interest,
that diminish your sense of responsibility,
that amplify all of your biases.
You'd have a justifying ideology to make it all seem fine.
You would have the responsibility so diffuse that nobody would really feel too
badly about it. Uh,
and you give these folks incredible political power,
including constitutional rights so that they could dominate your democracy so
that they could basically corporations can do whatever is legal
used to not be that way.
They could do whatever they were authorized to do by their charter,
and then they'd have to stop.
So they'd get the permission to build a canal and then they,
and then they'd be done and go away.
Eventually we made them immortal and they could do whatever they wanted,
as long as it's legal.
And then we gave them a huge amount of power to determine what actually is legal
by influence our democracy. I was.
Going to ask you about that. Like,
what is the birth of the limited liability corporation? Like when,
when did all that occur? Well, they go.
Way back. I mean, during the slave trade, they were,
they didn't necessarily call them that,
but they were essentially owned by shareholders. And so they would,
you know, pool their capital. So it was very similar. We've had corporate,
I mean, actually corporations are centuries old. If you go back to, I think,
some early universities and things,
but we w we didn't have kind of general purpose corporate laws in this country,
I think until mostly in the 18 hundreds.
So when we first formed this country, um,
you would have to go to the legislature. There were only a couple of,
of significant corporations around, even at the time of the founders.
And so that's why you really don't see corporations in the constitution.
They're not mentioned because they weren't very powerful when they did get more
powerful. You know, you have some quotes from some of the founders saying, oh,
this is, this is a little scary. Uh, and then of course,
they became very powerful in the 18 hundreds. You end up with a gilded age. And,
and so then you have folks like Teddy Roosevelt who are saying,
wait a minute, you know, this is a creation of law.
And so we get to determine how much power it has.
And he responded with the kind of trust busting movements,
breaking down some of the really big old trusts. Um, and, and that was,
you know, probably the first big pushback where, where the government said,
wait a minute, you corporations are too powerful.
We're going to try to reduce that power. Um,
and then I think the next big phase of that would have been in the depression
where you have the, the new deal coming in and saying, okay, banks,
you just wreck the economy. We're going to regulate you.
We're going to give workers more rights. We're going to create social security.
We're going to do all kinds of things that,
that diminish corporate power over the democracy.
And then it happened again in the sixties and seventies.
And what I think is that, is that it might be about to happen again,
given that there is now so much concern about corporate power,
uh, you know, citizens United influence over our democracy. Um,
people worried about concentration of wealth at the very, very tippy top. And,
uh, obviously people were that we are unable to deal with climate change.
And, uh,
another factor would be the power of social media corporations to influence
elections, to influence public discourse. Um,
they seem to have kind of snuck in,
in a way that was really unexpected and people didn't see it coming right.
Well, I mean, that's actually the pattern. People never see it coming.
All of these chapters pretty much begin with some kind of a discovery
and some industry races in there and takes advantage of it. I mean,
even slavery,
the discovery would have been the new world and this enormous commercial
opportunity, if you can just get the workers in there to,
to grow the tobacco and the cotton and the sugar. Um, but,
but so you'd have the discovery.
You have an industry springing up to take advantage of it and,
and making a lot of money and, and changing social norms along the way,
then problems are emerging. Obviously it was slavery, they were inherent,
but problems will emerge other people outside the industry,
discover those problems and pay attention to them, draw attention.
And then eventually you get to a law.
Now that's kind of an artificial ending because you have to make sure that law
gets enforced. But, but in almost all of these chapters,
you get to some form of government action where they say, no,
you can't do that anymore. We, we stop this industry, we ban this product,
or at least we're going to try to tweak your behavior. Um,
but that process, first of all, it takes a long,
long time and enormous damage can be done in the meantime. Um,
but that process doesn't work.
You don't even get your you're somewhat happy ending if the industry has become
so that,
that it determines whether it gets regulated or not.
And it blocks those regulations.